add istio inference support blog (#16697)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2025/infernece-extension-support/index.md

Reviewer: "infernece" => "inference"

(I have inferred that was your intention 😄)

Author: lol, thanks!

---
title: "Bringing AI-Aware Traffic Management to Istio: Gateway API Inference Extension Support"

> description: Introducing Gateway API Inference Extension support in Istio for optimizing traffic to AI Inference workloads.

Reviewer: Description reads like the title re-written.  Maybe cut the "Gateway API.." part from the title?

Author: idk, I still think it sits nicely.

how about:

Description: Optimized routing for AI workloads in Istio, powered by the latest Gateway API Inference Extension.

publishdate: 2025-07-22
attribution: "Lior Lieberman (Google), Keith Mattix (Microsoft), Aslak Knutsen (Red Hat)"
keywords: [istio,AI,inference,gateway-api-inference-extension]
---

The world of AI inference on Kubernetes presents unique challenges that traditional traffic-routing architectures weren't designed to handle. While Istio has long excelled at managing microservice traffic with sophisticated load balancing, security, and observability features, the demands of Large Language Model (LLM) workloads require specialized functionality.

That's why we're excited to announce Istio's support for the Gateway API Inference Extension, bringing intelligent, model-aware and LoRA-aware routing to Istio.

> ## **Why AI Workloads Need Special Treatment**

Reviewer: Shouldn't have `**`s in headings.

Traditional web services typically handle quick, stateless requests measured in milliseconds. AI inference workloads operate in a completely different paradigm that challenges conventional load balancing approaches in several fundamental ways.

### **The Scale and Duration Challenge**

> Unlike typical API responses that complete in milliseconds, AI inference requests often take significantly longer to process \- sometimes several seconds or even minutes rather than milliseconds. This dramatic difference in processing time means that routing decisions have far more impact than in traditional web services. A single poorly routed request can tie up expensive GPU resources for extended periods, creating cascading effects across the entire system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike typical API responses that complete in milliseconds, AI inference requests often take significantly longer to process — sometimes several seconds, or even minutes. This dramatic difference in processing time means that routing decisions have far more of an impact than in traditional web services. A single poorly-routed request can tie up expensive GPU resources for extended periods, creating cascading effects across the entire system.
```

Reviewer: just how my brain would autocomplete that sentence, probably not trying to anthropomorphise the router 😄 

(I was avoiding the use of milliseconds twice in the same sentence)

### **Queue Dynamics and Criticality**

AI inference workloads also introduce the concept of request criticality that's less common in traditional services. Real-time interactive applications (like chatbots or live content generation) require low latency and should be prioritized, while batch processing jobs or experimental workloads can tolerate higher latency or even be dropped during system overload.

Traditional load balancers lack the context to make these criticality-based decisions. They can't distinguish between a time-sensitive customer support query and a background batch job, leading to suboptimal resource allocation during peak demand periods.

This is where inference-aware routing becomes critical. Instead of treating all backends as equivalent black boxes, we need routing decisions that understand the current state and capabilities of each model server, including their queue depth, memory utilization, loaded adapters, and ability to handle requests of different criticality levels.

## **Gateway API Inference Extension: A Kubernetes-Native Solution**

> The [Kubernetes Gateway API Inference Extension](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#__tabbed_3_2) has introduced solutions to these challenges, building on the proven foundation of Kubernetes Gateway API while adding AI-specific intelligence. Rather than requiring organizations to patch together custom solutions or abandon their existing Kubernetes infrastructure, the extension provides a standardized, vendor-neutral approach to intelligent AI traffic management.

Reviewer: when introducing the concept, probably best to link to the root (https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/), not the Istio tab in the docs?

> The extension introduces two key Custom Resource Definitions that work together to address the routing challenges we've outlined. The InferenceModel resource provides an abstraction for AI-Inference workload owners to define logical model endpoints, while the InferencePool resource gives platform operators the tools to manage backend infrastructure with AI workload awareness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension introduces two key Custom Resource Definitions that work together to address the routing challenges we've outlined. The **InferenceModel** resource provides an abstraction for AI-Inference workload owners to define logical model endpoints, while the **InferencePool** resource gives platform operators the tools to manage backend infrastructure with AI workload awareness.
```

By extending the familiar Gateway API model rather than creating an entirely new paradigm, the inference extension enables organizations to leverage their existing Kubernetes expertise while gaining the specialized capabilities that AI workloads demand. This approach ensures that teams can adopt intelligent inference routing aligned with familiar networking knowledge and tooling.

> Note: InferenceModel is likely to change in future Gateway API Inference Extension releases.

Reviewer: How?  Enough to make it worth calling out specifically?

(If yes, [use a callout](https://istio.io/latest/docs/releases/contribute/shortcodes/#callouts))

### **InferenceModel**

The InferenceModel resource allows inference workload owners to define logical model endpoints that abstract the complexities of backend deployment.

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: inference.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: InferenceModel
metadata:
  name: customer-support-bot
  namespace: ai-workloads
spec:
  modelName: customer-support
  criticality: Critical
  poolRef:
    name: llama-pool
  targetModels:
    - name: llama-3-8b-customer-v1
      weight: 80
    - name: llama-3-8b-customer-v2
      weight: 20
{{< /text >}}

This configuration exposes a customer-support model that intelligently routes between two backend variants, enabling safe rollouts of new model versions while maintaining service availability.

### **InferencePool**

The InferencePool acts as a specialized backend service that understands AI workload characteristics:

{{< text yaml >}}
apiVersion: inference.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: InferencePool
metadata:
  name: llama-pool
  namespace: ai-workloads
spec:
  targetPortNumber: 8000
  selector:
    app: llama-server
    version: v1
  extensionRef:
    name: llama-endpoint-picker
{{< /text >}}

> When integrated with Istio, this pool automatically discovers model servers through the istio’s service discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When integrated with Istio, this pool automatically discovers model servers through service discovery.
```

(Fixing the typo, but calling out also that I don't understand the sentence.  It discovers model servers... based on their labels? Or are you about to tell me how in the next section?)

Author: no, based on istio's service discovery. We deploy a Service behind the scene and gets all of istio's semantics of creating endpoints and networking config from a Service

Reviewer: then "Istio's service discovery", but not "the istio's"

## **How Inference Routing Works in Istio**

> Istio's implementation builds on the service mesh's proven traffic management foundation. When a request enters the mesh through an Istio Gateway, it follows the standard Gateway API HTTPRoute matching rules. However, instead of using traditional load balancing algorithms, the backend is picked by an Endpoint Picker (EPP) service.

Reviewer: "Istio Gateway" implies the [legacy Gateway type](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/gateway/), but I assume you have to go through a Kubernetes-type Gateway

(Docs to make this suck less are coming soon)

Author: Thanks! changed to Kubernetes Gateway

The EPP evaluates multiple factors to select the optimal backend:

> **Request Criticality Assessment**: Critical requests receive priority routing to available servers, while lower criticality requests (Standard or Sheddable) may be load-shed during high utilization periods.
> 
> **Resource Utilization Analysis**: The extension monitors GPU memory usage, particularly KV cache utilization, to avoid overwhelming servers that are approaching capacity limits.
> 
> **Adapter Affinity**: For models using LoRA adapters, requests are preferentially routed to servers that already have the required adapter loaded, eliminating expensive loading overhead.
> 
> **Prefix-Cache Aware Load Balancing**: Routing decisions consider distributed KV cache states across model servers, and prioritize model servers that already have the prefix in their cache.
> 
> **Queue Depth Optimization**: By tracking request queue lengths across backends, the system avoids creating hotspots that would increase overall latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Request Criticality Assessment**: Critical requests receive priority routing to available servers, while lower criticality requests (Standard or Sheddable) may be load-shed during high utilization periods.

* **Resource Utilization Analysis**: The extension monitors GPU memory usage, particularly KV cache utilization, to avoid overwhelming servers that are approaching capacity limits.

* **Adapter Affinity**: For models using LoRA adapters, requests are preferentially routed to servers that already have the required adapter loaded, eliminating expensive loading overhead.

* **Prefix-Cache Aware Load Balancing**: Routing decisions consider distributed KV cache states across model servers, and prioritize model servers that already have the prefix in their cache.

* **Queue Depth Optimization**: By tracking request queue lengths across backends, the system avoids creating hotspots that would increase overall latency.
```

Author: I actually liked it the way it is right now, chosen not to do it bulleted by purpose. 

https://deploy-preview-16697--preliminary-istio.netlify.app/latest/blog/2025/infernece-extension-support/#how-inference-routing-works-in-istio

Reviewer: ok then; feel free to ignore, but I flagged it because it can otherwise be unclear that all these sentences link to "The EPP evaluates multiple factors to select the optimal backend:"

Author: you are right, actually. changing

This intelligent routing operates transparently within Istio's existing architecture, maintaining compatibility with features like mutual TLS, access policies, and distributed tracing.

### **Inference Routing Request Flow**

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./inference-request-flow.svg"
    alt="Flow of an inference request with gateway-api-inference-extension routing."
    >}}

> ## **The Road Ahead**

Reviewer: Can you add a summary sentence and turn the below into a bulleted list?

**Support for Waypoints** - As Istio continues to evolve toward ambient mesh architecture, inference-aware routing will be integrated into waypoint proxies to provide centralized, scalable policy enforcement for AI workloads.

Beyond Istio-specific innovations, the Gateway API Inference Extension community is also actively developing several advanced capabilities that will further enhance routing for for AI inference workloads on Kubernetes:

**HPA Integration for AI Metrics**: Horizontal Pod Autoscaling based on model-specific metrics rather than just CPU and memory.

**Multi-Modal Input Support**: Optimized routing for large multi-modal inputs and outputs (images, audio, video) with intelligent buffering and streaming capabilities.

**Heterogeneous Accelerator Support**: Intelligent routing across different accelerator types (GPUs, TPUs, specialized AI chips) with latency and cost-aware load balancing.

## **Getting Started with Istio Inference Extension**

> Ready to try inference-aware routing with Istio? The implementation is officially available starting release 1.27!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ready to try inference-aware routing? The implementation is officially available starting in Istio 1.27!
```

Author: "starting in" sounds weird, was it intentional?

Author: changed to "Istio 1.27"

Reviewer: perhaps it's just an international thing, you could say "starting with", but it was missing a word wither way

> For installation and guides, please follow the Istio specific guidance in the [Gateway API Inference Extension website](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#__tabbed_3_2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For installation and guides, please follow the Istio-specific guidance on the [Gateway API Inference Extension website](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#__tabbed_3_2).
```

For detailed benchmark results and methodology, see the [Gateway API Inference Extension performance evaluation](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2025/06/05/introducing-gateway-api-inference-extension/#benchmarks) with testing data using H100 GPUs and vLLM deployments.

The integration with Istio's existing infrastructure means these benefits come with minimal operational overhead, and your existing monitoring, security, and traffic management configurations continue to work unchanged.

## **Conclusion**

The Gateway API Inference Extension represents a significant step forward in making Kubernetes truly AI-ready, and Istio's implementation brings this intelligence to the service mesh layer where it can have maximum impact. By combining inference-aware routing with Istio's proven security, observability, and traffic management capabilities, we're enabling organizations to run AI workloads with the same operational excellence they expect from their traditional services.

---

> *Have a question or want to get involved? Join the discussion on Kubernetes Slack - [#gateway-api-inference-extension](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C08E3RZMT2P) channel or on [the Istio Slack](https://slack.istio.io).*

Reviewer: That first link will only work if you're already on the Kubernetes Slack.  Perhaps something like
```suggestion
*Have a question or want to get involved? [Join the Kubernetes Slack](http://slack.kubernetes.io/ and then find us on the [#gateway-api-inference-extension](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C08E3RZMT2P) channel or [discuss on the Istio Slack](https://slack.istio.io).*
```

Author: good callout!
